---
layout: post
title:  "Enter IOT"
ref:    2023-01-01-enter-iot
lang:   en
date:   2023-01-01 10:56:28 +02:00
tags:   linux iot python
---

Here is one simple and cheap way to automate electric boiler activation. There
are lots of "smart power plug" available on OLX. Especially the ones from
[tuya](https://www.tuya.com/). For example, I was able to purchase one for
300 ₴ (~$8). It came without any written instruction or even an
identification. However, there are lots of guides and manuals on the web, and it
was a matter of error and trial to get it creating a WiFi hotspot. Then after
connecting to it, the
Android application [Smart
Life](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.tuya.smartlife&gl=US)
can be used to configure plug's connection to the LAN WiFi. That's just enough
to start manually controlling the plug like turning it on and off on schedule.

Now imagine I'd like to do something that's not a stock functionality. For
example, when the power is cut for some load shedding, and comes back a bit
later, I'd like to make sure the water boiler stays switched off for extra
minutes before turning on. This would allow the grid to ramp up the power supply
without causing immediate overload. An incentive for custom automation!

I took the first Python library that popped in the search:
[tinytuya](https://pypi.org/project/tinytuya/). It has detailed instructions on
how to register as a developer, discover the device id and get the necessary key
to control the device. I ended up customizing one of the examples to ensuring
the switch is on:

```python
#!/usr/bin/env python

import tinytuya, time

while True:
    try:
        d = tinytuya.OutletDevice(dev_id="<id>", address="<addr>", local_key="<key>", version=3.3)
        status = d.status()
        if status['dps']['1']:
            break
        print("Turn on")
        d.turn_on()
        time.sleep(60)
    except Exception as e:
        print(f"Exception {e}")
        time.sleep(10)
```

The script then is wrapped into a systemd service:

```
[Unit]
Description=Boiler power on
After=network-online.target
Wants=network-online.target

[Service]
Type=oneshot
User=sakhnik
Group=users
ExecStart=/usr/bin/python /home/sakhnik/work/boiler/boiler.py
StandardOutput=journal

[Install]   
WantedBy=default.target
```

The service should be started by a timer:

```
[Unit]
Description=Start boiler deferred after boot

[Timer]
OnBootSec=15min

[Install]
WantedBy=timers.target
```

And the timer needs to be enabled:

```
systemctl daemon-reload
systemctl enable boiler.timer
```

Now, the switch relay can be configured to start in the switched off state after
powering up in the Smart Life app. When the power is restored, the switch is
initially off and the computer is booting up. After 15 minutes, the timer
kicks off the boiler service running the program, which turns the switch on.
It's a one-time action, so one can continue managing the switch manually.

There are disadvantages in this system too. For example, the privacy. Although,
there's very little harm that can be done, I don't particularly like to share
my internal network layout with Tuya. I'd rather prefer to have a direct access
to the plug without engaging complex external servers. I've just heard that
this might be possible with some other smart plug producers. Looking forward
to explore.
